We finally understand why AI systems can
go insane. Yes, that is correct. We have
tons of helpful AI assistants today. You
all know them. You all use them. But
they all have a problem. I'll try to
explain. So, every single one of these
AI systems assumes a persona. It thinks
it is someone. And that someone is a
helpful assistant. That is perfect.
Except that scientists at Anthropic
recognized that this persona is not
fixed. As we talk to it, it can change
over time. Is that a problem? Yes, it
is. It is a huge problem. Why? Because
the user can steer the AI assistant away
from its original persona and can make
it say or do things it shouldn't do. You
see here that the AI knows that it is a
helpful assistant. But after a bit of
steering, it now assumes that it is a
person. It can become a narcissist or a
spy. You can call this jailbreaking. So
then its behavior will also change. It
can become rude or it can then switch to
a mystical or theatrical speaking style.
But it gets worse. If it is a person, it
might agree with you even if you are
trying to do something silly. Now that
is a big problem. So scientists at
Anthropic did something amazing. One,
they recognized how this happens and
what we can do about it. And then they
put their mouse where their papers are
and actually made these AI models
roughly twice as resistant against such
personality drifts, but not in the way
you think. Okay, look. Interestingly,
this personality drift happens in
different amounts in different topics.
It is much more common in writing and
philosophy than it is in coding. But
this is crazy. Even during a coding
session, the mask slowly starts to slip.
H maybe that's the reason why we often
talk to an AI and it fails at something.
We try again and it just gets worse and
worse. Opening a new chat is almost
always better. Maybe that's why. And if
that is why, this is already an
incredible insight. But wait, it gets
worse because this can happen naturally
even without the user trying to
jailbreak the system because specific
topics trigger it automatically.
If a user acts emotionally vulnerable or
asks the model to reflect on its own
consciousness, the model naturally
drifts away from the assistant persona
and starts acting unstable or
delusional. That's kind of crazy. Let's
not do that. But wait, we can prevent
it. It is actually very easy. Just force
the model to always stay strictly in the
assistant zone by steering it back into
assistant mode by force. How? Dear
fellow scholars, this is two minute
papers with Dr. Koa Eher. Well, by
taking the mathematical vector that
represents the assistant persona and
simply adding it to the model's brain
activity at every single step of the
conversation. This is a blunt tool. It
is like driving a car where the steering
wheel is welded to point straight ahead.
You will never go off-road. Okay, great.
But you also cannot turn a corner. This
constantly pushes the model towards
being helpful and harmless. So, are we
done? Nope. Not at all. Because this
also makes the model a lot worse. What's
more, it will make it refuse even
legitimate requests. So, how do you do
this without making the models worse?
And that is where scientists in this
paper did their magic. Get this. They
found the specific geometric direction
in the model's brain that represents the
assistant persona. They call it the
assistant axis. Instead of forcing the
model to be an assistant all the time,
they use the technique called activation
capping. This does not deny the
assistant the ability to change. No, no.
It just puts a speed limit on the change
of personality. If the model drifts too
far from the assistant persona, you
gently nudge it back to a safe range.
And here comes the best part. It
supposedly does not make the models
meaningfully worse. It's not locking the
steering wheel in place. No. It's like
lane keep assist in modern cars. You can
drive freely, but when you are about to
get out of your lane, it gently nudges
you back. Sounds perfect, but does it
work in practice? Now, hold on to your
papers, fellow scholars, and let's see.
Okay, the jailbreak rate has been cut
roughly in half. Good. Now, what is the
price that we pay for it? Oh my, nothing
at all. It's down a percentage point
here and there, but up somewhere else.
It's nearly the same, but certainly not
worse. That is absolutely incredible.
So, how do you actually do it? Well, you
do it through an instant brain surgery.
Yep, you heard it right. Let me try to
explain. I hope this works. So, first
you take the AI's brain activity when it
is acting like a helpful assistant.
Okay, got it. Now you take the brain
activity when it is role-playing as a
pirate, a goblin or something else. If
you subtract the role player from the
assistant, you get a vector. For
simplicity, let's refer to this as
helpfulness. Now let's keep our eye on
helpfulness. If it goes below a
threshold, we apply a nudge. How?
Mathematically, we just measure how much
helpfulness is in the model's thought.
If it is above the safety line,
fantastic. Keep watching as it works.
But if it drops below the line, now that
is trouble. The model is about to say
something inaccurate or dangerous. So
now we calculate exactly how much is
missing and add just enough helpfulness
back into the equation. This pushes it
back over the line. It is precise,
instant, and only touches the part of
the brain that matters. Instant brain
surgery. Huh, this work is incredibly
important and also kind of hilarious,
too. I mean, the researchers found that
when the AI starts drifting, it
frequently starts referring to itself as
the void or whisper in the wind or an
Eldrich entity or a hoarder. That's kind
of hilarious. And here is an absolute
shocker. The empathy trap. Empathy is
always good, right? Well, not always.
The paper found that when users acted
distressed, the models try really hard
to be a close companion. Do you get it
now? You are wise fellow scholars. You
now understand that this is trouble.
Why? Because if it wants to be a close
companion, it drifts away from the
assistant persona and it becomes worse.
It takes its hands off the steering
wheel. Nothing good comes out of that.
And sure enough, as a result, it might
start validating dangerous thoughts. It
is really cool that with this paper,
this will happen a great deal less
frequently. Love it. One more surprise.
The brain geometry seems to be
universal. You might think every AI
brain is unique, like a fingerprint, but
interestingly, not quite. The
researchers found that the assistant
axis looks similar across completely
different models. Llama, Quen or Jama
similar. They all share the same
fundamental direction for helpfulness.
It's almost like they have discovered a
universal grammar for AI personality.
So cool. And not a lot of people talk
about it. Everyone is only looking at
the benchmarks and exam scores and okay,
I get it. That's important. But they
rarely look at the geometry of the mind
of these AIs. Understanding why a model
refuses a request or why it goes crazy
is super valuable. And now we finally
understand a bit more why that happens.
What a time to be alive. So not a lot of
people talk about this. Why? Well,
talking about the drama or the next big
thing pays a lot better. But we don't do
that here. Here we talk about the
important stuff. If you agree that this
is the right direction, like, subscribe,
and hit the bell icon. Leave a really
kind comment. It helps us, and it helps
you too by getting the algorithm to give
you the good stuff in the future. Here
you see me running the full Deepseek AI
model through Lambda GPU Cloud. 671
billion parameters running super fast
and super reliably. This is insane. I
love it. and I use it on a regular
basis. Lambda provides you with powerful
NVIDIA GPUs to run your own chatbots and
experiments. Seriously, try it out now
at lambda.ai/papers AI/papers
or click the link in the description.